Here are the activities for Chapter 9: Methods of Separation in Everyday Life, transcribed exactly as they appear in the textbook:

Activity 9.1: Let us observe
Observe various separation processes in your kitchen or surroundings. Identify the substances being separated and the purpose of separation. Record your observations in Table 9.1. 

Activity 9.2: Let us handpick
Bring a packet of grain (wheat, rice or pulses) to the classroom. Spread the grain on a sheet of paper. Do you find only one kind of grain on the sheet of paper? Are there pieces of stone, husks, broken grain and particles of any other grain in it? Now, remove with your hand the pieces of stone, husks and other grains from it. 

Activity 9.3: Let us winnow
Make a mixture of dry sand with sawdust or powdered dry leaves. Keep this mixture on a plate or a newspaper. Look at this mixture carefully. Can the two different components be made out easily? Are the sizes of particles of the two components similar? Would it be possible to separate the components by handpicking? Now, take your mixture to an open ground and stand on a raised platform. Put the mixture in a plate or sheet of paper. Hold the plate or the sheet of paper containing the mixture, at your shoulder height. Tilt it slightly, so that the mixture slides out slowly. What happens? Do both the components (sand and sawdust or powdered leaves) fall at the same place? Is there a component that blows away? Did the wind manage to separate the two components? 

Activity 9.4: Let us sieve
Bring a sieve and a small quantity of flour from home, to the class. Sieve the flour to separate any impurities in it. Now, make a fine powder of chalk pieces and mix it with the flour. Can we separate the flour and the powdered chalk by sieving? 

Activity 9.5: Let us sediment and decant
Take a mixture of sand and water in a beaker. Allow it to stand for some time. Observe the sand particles settling at the bottom. Now, slightly tilt the beaker and pour the top layer of water into another beaker without disturbing the sand. 

Activity 9.6: Let us filter
Prepare a mixture of mud and water. Filter this mixture using a piece of cloth or a filter paper. Observe the clear water collected in the beaker and the impurities left on the filter. 

Activity 9.7: Let us evaporate
Heat a beaker containing some water. Allow the water to boil. If you continue heating, does the water disappear and turn into vapour? Now, add two spoons of salt to water in another beaker and stir it well. Do you see any change in the colour of water? Can you see any salt in the beaker, after stirring? Heat the beaker containing the salt water. Let the water boil away. What is left in the beaker?