9.3 Methods of Separation
We will discuss some simple methods of separating substances that are mixed together. You may come across some of these methods being used in your day-to-day activities.

9.3.1 Handpicking
This method of handpicking can be used for separating slightly larger sized impurities like the pieces of dirt, stone, and husk from wheat, rice or pulses. The quantity of such impurities is usually not very large. In such situations, we find that handpicking is a convenient method of separating substances.

9.3.2 Threshing
The process that is used to separate grain from stalks etc. is threshing. In this process, the stalks are beaten to free the grain seeds. Sometimes, threshing is done with the help of bullocks. Machines are also used to thresh large quantities of grain.

9.3.3 Winnowing
This method of separating components of a mixture is called winnowing. Winnowing is used to separate heavier and lighter components of a mixture by wind or by blowing air. This method is commonly used by farmers to separate lighter husk particles from heavier seeds of grain.

9.3.4 Sieving
Sometimes, we may wish to prepare a dish with flour. We need to remove impurities and bran that may be present in it. We use a sieve and pour the flour into it. Sieving allows the fine flour particles to pass through the holes of the sieve while the bigger impurities remain on the sieve.

9.3.5 Sedimentation, Decantation and Filtration
Sometimes it may not be possible to separate components of a mixture by winnowing and handpicking. For example, there may be lighter impurities like dust or soil particles in rice or pulses.


Sedimentation: When the heavier component in a mixture settles after water is added to it, the process is called sedimentation.


Decantation: When the water (along with the dust) is removed, the process is called decantation.


Filtration: The process used to separate solid particles from a liquid using a filter paper or a strainer is called filtration. For example, separating tea leaves from tea using a strainer.

9.3.6 Evaporation
The process of conversion of water into its vapour is called evaporation. The process of evaporation can be used to separate a solid substance that has dissolved in water. For example, obtaining salt from sea water.