Chemicals from Common Salt
By now you have learnt that the salt formed
by the combination of hydrochloric acid and
sodium hydroxide solution is called sodium
chloride. This is the salt that you use in food.
You must have observed in the above Activity
that it is a neutral salt.
Seawater contains many salts dissolved
in it. Sodium chloride is separated from these
salts. Deposits of solid salt are also found in
several parts of the world. These large crystals
are often brown due to impurities. This is
called rock salt. Beds of rock salt were formed
when seas of bygone ages dried up. Rock salt
is mined like coal.
You must have heard about Mahatma Gandhi’s Dandi March. Did
you know that sodium chloride was such an important symbol in our
struggle for freedom?

Common salt — A raw material for chemicals
The common salt thus obtained is an important raw material for various
materials of daily use, such as sodium hydroxide, baking soda, washing
soda, bleaching powder and many more. Let us see how one substance
is used for making all these different substances.
Sodium hydroxide
When electricity is passed through an aqueous solution of sodium
chloride (called brine), it decomposes to form sodium hydroxide. The
process is called the chlor-alkali process because of the products formed–
chlor for chlorine and alkali for sodium hydroxide.
2NaCl(aq) + 2H2O(l)--->>NaOH(aq) + Cl2
(g) + H2
(g)
Chlorine gas is given off at the anode, and hydrogen gas at the cathode.
Sodium hydroxide solution is formed near the cathode. The three
products produced in this process are all useful. Figure 2.8 shows the
different uses of these products.

Bleaching powder
You have already come to know that chlorine is produced during the
electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride (brine). This chlorine gas is used
for the manufacture of bleaching powder. Bleaching powder is produced
by the action of chlorine on dry slaked lime [Ca(OH)2
]. Bleaching powder
is represented as Ca(ClO)2
, though the actual composition is quite
complex.
2Ca(OH)2 + 2Cl2 → Ca(ClO)2 + CaCl2 + 2H2O

Bleaching powder is used –
(i) for bleaching cotton and linen in the textile industry, for bleaching
wood pulp in paper factories and for bleaching washed clothes
in laundry;
(ii) as an oxidising agent in many chemical industries; and
(iii) to make drinking water free from germs.
Baking soda
The baking soda is commonly used in the kitchen for making tasty crispy
pakoras, etc. Sometimes it is added for faster cooking. The chemical
name of the compound is sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO3
). It is
produced using sodium chloride as one of the raw materials.
NaCl + H2O + CO2 + NH3 → NH4Cl + NaHCO3
(Ammonium chloride)      (Sodium hydrogencarbonate)

Did you check the pH of sodium hydrogencarbonate in Activity 2.14? 
Can you correlate why it can be used to neutralise an acid? It is a mild 
non-corrosive basic salt. The following reaction takes place when it is 
heated during cooking –

2NaHCO3 --Heat--> Na2CO3 + H2O + CO2
(Sodium hydrogencarbonate)      (Sodium carbonate)

Sodium hydrogencarbonate has various uses in the household.

Uses of Baking Soda:

(i) For making baking powder, which is a mixture of baking soda 
(sodium hydrogencarbonate) and a mild edible acid such as tartaric acid. 
When baking powder is heated or mixed in water, the following reaction 
takes place –

NaHCO3 + H+ → CO2 + H2O + Sodium salt of acid
(From any acid)

Carbon dioxide produced during the reaction causes bread or cake 
to rise, making them soft and spongy.

(ii) Sodium hydrogencarbonate is also an ingredient in antacids. 
Being alkaline, it neutralises excess acid in the stomach and provides relief.

(iii) It is also used in soda-acid fire extinguishers.

Washing Soda:

Another chemical that can be obtained from sodium chloride is 
Na2CO3·10H2O (washing soda). Sodium carbonate can be obtained 
by heating baking soda; recrystallisation of sodium carbonate gives 
washing soda. It is also a basic salt.

Na2CO3 + 10H2O → Na2CO3·10H2O
(Sodium carbonate)      (Washing soda)

What does 10H2O signify? Does it make Na2CO3
 wet? We will address
this question in the next section.
Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate are useful
chemicals for many industrial processes as well.
Uses of washing soda
(i) Sodium carbonate (washing soda) is used in glass, soap and
paper industries.
(ii) It is used in the manufacture of sodium compounds such as borax.
(iii) Sodium carbonate can be used as a cleaning agent for domestic
purposes.
(iv) It is used for removing permanent hardness of water.



