Importance of pH in Everyday Life yday Lifeyday Life

Are plants and animals pH sensitive?
Our body works within the pH range of 7.0 to 7.8. Living organisms can
survive only in a narrow range of pH change. When pH of rain water is
less than 5.6, it is called acid rain. When acid rain flows into the rivers, it
lowers the pH of the river water. The survival of aquatic life in such rivers
becomes difficult.

What is the pH of the soil in your backyard?
Plants require a specific pH range for their healthy growth. To find out
the pH required for the healthy growth of a plant, you can collect the soil
from various places and check the pH in the manner described below in
Activity 2.12. Also, you can note down which plants are growing in the
region from which you have collected the soil.

pH in our digestive system
It is very interesting to note that our stomach produces hydrochloric
acid. It helps in the digestion of food without harming the stomach.
During indigestion the stomach produces too much acid and this causes
pain and irritation. To get rid of this pain, people use bases called
antacids. One such remedy must have been suggested by you at the
beginning of this Chapter. These antacids neutralise the excess acid.
Magnesium hydroxide (Milk of magnesia), a mild base, is often used for
this purpose.

pH change as the cause of tooth decay
Tooth decay starts when the pH of the mouth is lower than 5.5. Tooth
enamel, made up of calcium hydroxyapatite (a crystalline form of calcium
phosphate) is the hardest substance in the body. It does not dissolve in
water, but is corroded when the pH in the mouth is below 5.5. Bacteria
present in the mouth produce acids by degradation of sugar and food
particles remaining in the mouth after eating. The best way to prevent
this is to clean the mouth after eating food. Using toothpastes, which are
generally basic, for cleaning the teeth can neutralise the excess acid and
prevent tooth decay.

Self defence by animals and plants through chemical warfare
Have you ever been stung by a honey-bee? Bee-sting leaves an acid
which causes pain and irritation. Use of a mild base like baking soda
on the stung area gives relief. Stinging hair of nettle leaves inject
methanoic acid causing burning pain.