 FORCE ON A CURRENT-CARRYING CONDUCTOR
IN A MAGNETIC FIELD

We have learnt that an electric current flowing through a conductor
produces a magnetic field. The field so produced exerts a force on a
magnet placed in the vicinity of the conductor. French scientist Andre
Marie Ampere (1775–1836) suggested that the magnet must also exert
an equal and opposite force on the current-carrying conductor. The force
due to a magnetic field acting on a current-carrying conductor can be
demonstrated through the following activity.

The displacement of the rod in the above activity suggests that a
force is exerted on the current-carrying aluminium rod when it is placed
in a magnetic field. It also suggests that the direction of force is also
reversed when the direction of current through the conductor is reversed.
Now change the direction of field to vertically downwards by
interchanging the two poles of the magnet. It is once again observed that
the direction of force acting on the current-carrying rod gets reversed. It
shows that the direction of the force on the conductor depends upon the
direction of current and the direction of the magnetic field. Experiments
have shown that the displacement of the rod is largest (or the magnitude
of the force is the highest) when the direction of current is at right angles
to the direction of the magnetic field. In such a condition we can use a
simple rule to find the direction of the force on the conductor.
In Activity 12.7, we considered the
direction of the current and that of the magnetic
field perpendicular to each other and found
that the force is perpendicular to both of them.
The three directions can be illustrated through
a simple rule, called Fleming’s left-hand rule.
According to this rule, stretch the thumb,
forefinger and middle finger of your left hand
such that they are mutually perpendicular
(Fig. 12.13). If the first finger points in the
direction of magnetic field and the second
finger in the direction of current, then the
thumb will point in the direction of motion or
the force acting on the conductor.
Devices that use current-carrying conductors and magnetic fields
include electric motor, electric generator, loudspeakers, microphones
and measuring instruments.
