MAGNETIC FIELD AND FIELD LINES

We are familiar with the fact that a compass needle gets deflected when
brought near a bar magnet. A compass needle is, in fact, a small bar
magnet. The ends of the compass needle point approximately towards
north and south directions. The end pointing towards north is called north
seeking or north pole. The other end that points towards south is called
south seeking or south pole. Through various activities we have observed
that like poles repel, while unlike poles of magnets attract each other.
The iron filings arrange themselves in a pattern as shown
Fig. 12.2. Why do the iron filings arrange in such a pattern? What does
this pattern demonstrate? The magnet exerts its influence in the region
surrounding it. Therefore the iron filings experience a force. The force
thus exerted makes iron filings to arrange in a pattern. The region
surrounding a magnet, in which the force of the magnet can be detected,
is said to have a magnetic field. The lines along which the iron filings
align themselves represent magnetic field lines.
Are there other ways of obtaining magnetic field lines around a bar
magnet? Yes, you can yourself draw the field lines of a bar magnet.

Magnetic field is a quantity that has both direction and magnitude.
The direction of the magnetic field is taken to be the direction in which a
north pole of the compass needle moves inside it. Therefore it is taken
by convention that the field lines emerge from north pole and merge at
the south pole (note the arrows marked on the field lines in Fig. 12.4).
Inside the magnet, the direction of field lines is from its south pole to its
north pole. Thus the magnetic field lines are closed curves.
The relative strength of the magnetic field is shown by the degree of
closeness of the field lines. The field is stronger, that is, the force acting
on the pole of another magnet placed is greater where the field lines are
crowded (see Fig. 12.4).
No two field-lines are found to cross each other. If they did, it would
mean that at the point of intersection, the compass needle would point
towards two directions, which is not possible.
