DOMESTIC ELECTRIC CIRCUITS

In our homes, we receive supply of electric power through a main supply
(also called mains), either supported through overhead electric poles or
by underground cables. One of the wires in this supply, usually with
red insulation cover, is called live wire (or positive). Another wire, with
black insulation, is called neutral wire (or negative). In our country, the
potential difference between the two is 220 V.
At the meter-board in the house, these wires pass into an electricity
meter through a main fuse. Through the main switch they are connected
to the line wires in the house. These wires supply electricity to separate
circuits within the house. Often, two separate circuits are used, one of
15 A current rating for appliances with higher power ratings such as
geysers, air coolers, etc. The other circuit is of 5 A current rating for
bulbs, fans, etc. The earth wire, which has insulation of green colour, is
usually connected to a metal plate deep in the earth near the house.
This is used as a safety measure, especially for those appliances that
have a metallic body, for example, electric press, toaster, table fan,
refrigerator, etc. The metallic body is connected to the earth wire, which
provides a low-resistance conducting path for the current. Thus, it
ensures that any leakage of current to the metallic body of the appliance
keeps its potential to that of the earth, and the user may not get a severe
electric shock.Figure 12.15 gives a schematic diagram of one of the common
domestic circuits. In each separate circuit, different appliances can be
connected across the live and neutral wires. Each appliance has a
separate switch to ‘ON’/‘OFF’ the flow of current through it. In order
that each appliance has equal potential difference, they are connected
parallel to each other.
Electric fuse is an important component of all domestic circuits. We
have already studied the principle and working of a fuse in the previous
chapter (see Section 11.7). A fuse in a circuit prevents damage to the
appliances and the circuit due to overloading. Overloading can occur
when the live wire and the neutral wire come into direct contact. (This
occurs when the insulation of wires is damaged or there is a fault in the
appliance.) In such a situation, the current in the circuit abruptly
increases. This is called short-circuiting. The use of an electric fuse
prevents the electric circuit and the appliance from a possible damage
by stopping the flow of unduly high electric current. The Joule heating
that takes place in the fuse melts it to break the electric circuit.
Overloading can also occur due to an accidental hike in the supply
voltage. Sometimes overloading is caused by connecting too many
appliances to a single socket.
