 The Refractive Index

You have already studied that a ray of light that travels obliquely from
one transparent medium into another will change its direction in the
second medium. The extent of the change in direction that takes place
in a given pair of media may be expressed in terms of the refractive index,
the “constant” appearing on the right-hand side of Eq.(9.4).
The refractive index can be linked to an important physical quantity,
the relative speed of propagation of light in different media. It turns
out that light propagates with different speeds in different media. Light
travels fastest in vacuum with speed of 3×108
 m s–1. In air, the speed of
light is only marginally less, compared to that in vacuum. It reduces
considerably in glass or water. The value of the refractive index for a
given pair of media depends upon the speed of light in the two media, as
given below.
Consider a ray of light travelling from medium 1 into medium 2, as
shown in Fig.9.11. Let v1
 be the speed of light in medium 1 and v2
 be the
speed of light in medium 2. The refractive index of medium 2 with respect
to medium 1 is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium 1 and
the speed of light in medium 2. This is usually represented by the symbol
n21. This can be expressed in an equation form as
n21=Speed of light in medium 1/Speed of light in medium 2=v1/v2

(9.5)
By the same argument, the refractive index of medium
1 with respect to medium 2 is represented as n12.It is given
by
n12=Speed of light in medium 2/Speed of light in medium 1=v2/v1

(9.6)
If medium 1 is vacuum or air, then the refractive index of medium 2
is considered with respect to vacuum. This is called the absolute refractive
index of the medium. It is simply represented as n2
. If c is the speed of light in air and v is the speed of light in the medium, then, the refractive
index of the medium nm
 is given by
nm=Speed of light in air/Speed of light in the medium=c/v
(9.7)
The absolute refractive index of a medium is simply called its refractive
index. The refractive index of several media is given in Table 9.3. From
the Table you can know that the refractive index of water, nw
 = 1.33.
This means that the ratio of the speed of light in air and the speed of
light in water is equal to 1.33. Similarly, the refractive index of crown
glass, ng
 =1.52. Such data are helpful in many places. However, you
need not memorise the data.