Refraction through a Rectangular Glass Slab

To understand the phenomenon of refraction of light through a glass
slab, let us do an Activity.
In this Activity, you will note, the light ray has changed its direction
at points O and O′. Note that both the points O and O′ lie on surfaces
separating two transparent media. Draw a perpendicular NN’ to AB at O
and another perpendicular MM′ to CD at O′. The light ray at point O has
entered from a rarer medium to a denser medium, that is, from air to
glass. Note that the light ray has bent towards
the normal. At O′, the light ray has entered
from glass to air, that is, from a denser
medium to a rarer medium. The light here
has bent away from the normal. Compare the
angle of incidence with the angle of refraction
at both refracting surfaces AB and CD.
In Fig. 9.10, a ray EO is obliquely
incident on surface AB, called incident ray.
OO′ is the refracted ray and O′ H is the
emergent ray. You may observe that the
emergent ray is parallel to the direction of
the incident ray. Why does it happen so? The
extent of bending of the ray of light at the
opposite parallel faces AB (air-glass interface)
and CD (glass-air interface) of the rectangular
glass slab is equal and opposite. This is why
the ray emerges parallel to the incident ray.
However, the light ray is shifted sideward
slightly. What happens when a light ray is
incident normally to the interface of two
media? Try and find out.
Now you are familiar with the refraction of light. Refraction is due to
change in the speed of light as it enters from one transparent medium to
another. Experiments show that refraction of light occurs according to
certain laws.The following are the laws of refraction of light.
 (i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the interface
of two transparent media at the point of incidence, all lie in the
same plane.
(ii) The ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of
refraction is a constant, for the light of a given colour and for
the given pair of media. This law is also known as Snell’s law of
refraction. (This is true for angle 0 < i < 90o
)
If i is the angle of incidence and r is the angle of refraction, then,
sin i/sin r = constant (9.4)
This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first. Let us study about refractive index in some detail.
