Representation of Images Formed by Spherical
Mirrors Using Ray Diagrams

We can also study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by
drawing ray diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed
in front of a spherical mirror. Each small portion of the extended object
acts like a point source. An infinite number of rays originate from each
of these points. To construct the ray diagrams, in order to locate the
image of an object, an arbitrarily large number of rays emanating from a
point could be considered. However, it is more convenient to consider
only two rays, for the sake of clarity of the ray diagram. These rays are
so chosen that it is easy to know their directions after reflection from the
mirror.
The intersection of at least two reflected rays give the position of image
of the point object. Any two of the following rays can be considered for
locating the image.

(i) A ray parallel to the principal
axis, after reflection, will pass
through the principal focus
in case of a concave mirror
or appear to diverge from
the principal focus in
case of a convex mirror.
This is illustrated in Fig.9.3
(a) and (b). 

(ii) A ray passing through the
principal focus of a concave
mirror or a ray which is
directed towards the
principal focus of a convex
mirror, after reflection, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is
illustrated in Fig.9.4 (a)
and (b).
(iii) A ray passing through the
centre of curvature of a
concave mirror or directed
in the direction of the centre
of curvature of a convex
mirror, after reflection, is
reflected back along the
same path. This is
illustrated in Fig.9.5 (a) and
(b). The light rays come back
along the same path
because the incident rays
fall on the mirror along the
normal to the reflecting
surface

(iv) A ray incident obliquely to
the principal axis, towards
a point P (pole of the mirror),
on the concave mirror
[Fig. 9.6 (a)] or a convex
mirror [Fig. 9.6 (b)], is
reflected obliquely. The
incident and reflected rays
follow the laws of reflection
at the point of incidence
(point P), making equal
angles with the principal axis.
(a) (b)
Figure 9.4
Remember that in all the above cases the laws of reflection are followed.
At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that
the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.



