SPHERICAL MIRRORS

The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror may be curved inwards or
outwards. A spherical mirror, whose reflecting surface is curved inwards,
that is, faces towards the centre of the sphere, is called a concave mirror.
A spherical mirror whose reflecting surface is curved outwards, is called
a convex mirror. The schematic representation of these mirrors is shown
in Fig. 9.1. You may note in these diagrams that the back
of the mirror is shaded.
You may now understand that the surface of the spoon
curved inwards can be approximated to a concave mirror
and the surface of the spoon bulged outwards can be
approximated to a convex mirror.
Before we move further on spherical mirrors, we need to
recognise and understand the meaning of a few terms. These
terms are commonly used in discussions about spherical
mirrors. The centre of the reflecting surface of a spherical
mirror is a point called the pole. It lies on the surface of the
mirror. The pole is usually represented by the letter P.
The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part of a sphere.
This sphere has a centre. This point is called the centre of curvature of
the spherical mirror. It is represented by the letter C. Please note that the
centre of curvature is not a part of the mirror. It lies outside its reflecting
surface. The centre of curvature of a concave mirror lies in front of it.
However, it lies behind the mirror in case of a convex mirror. You may
note this in Fig.9.2 (a) and (b). The radius of the sphere of which the
reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part, is called the radius
of curvature of the mirror. It is represented by the letter R. You may note
that the distance PC is equal to the radius of curvature. Imagine a straight
line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature of a spherical
mirror. This line is called the principal axis. Remember that principal
axis is normal to the mirror at its pole. Let us understand an important
term related to mirrors, through an Activity.

The paper at first begins to burn producing smoke. Eventually it
may even catch fire. Why does it burn? The light from the Sun is converged
at a point, as a sharp, bright spot by the mirror. In fact, this spot of light
is the image of the Sun on the sheet of paper. This point is
the focus of the concave mirror. The heat produced due to
the concentration of sunlight ignites the paper. The distance
of this image from the position of the mirror gives the
approximate value of focal length of the mirror.
Let us try to understand this observation with the help
of a ray diagram.
Observe Fig.9.2 (a) closely. A number of rays parallel
to the principal axis are falling on a concave mirror. Observe
the reflected rays. They are all meeting/intersecting at a
point on the principal axis of the mirror. This point is called
the principal focus of the concave mirror. Similarly, observe
Fig. 9.2 (b). How are the rays parallel to the principal axis,
reflected by a convex mirror? The reflected rays appear to
come from a point on the principal axis. This point is called
the principal focus of the convex mirror. The principal focus
is represented by the letter F. The distance between the
pole and the principal focus of a spherical mirror is called
the focal length. It is represented by the letter f
The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is by-and-large spherical.
The surface, then, has a circular outline. The diameter of the reflecting
surface of spherical mirror is called its aperture. In Fig.9.2, distance MN
represents the aperture. We shall consider in our discussion only such
spherical mirrors whose aperture is much smaller than its radius of
curvature.
Is there a relationship between the radius of curvature R, and focal
length f, of a spherical mirror? For spherical mirrors of small apertures,
the radius of curvature is found to be equal to twice the focal length. We
put this as R = 2f . This implies that the principal focus of a spherical
mirror lies midway between the pole and centre of curvature.


