(a) Image formation by Concave Mirror
Figure 9.7 illustrates the ray diagrams for the formation of image
by a concave mirror for various positions of the object.

Uses of concave mirrors
Concave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights and
vehicles headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are
often used as shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The
dentists use concave mirrors to see large images of the teeth of patients.
Large concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce
heat in solar furnaces.

(b) Image formation by a Convex Mirror
We studied the image formation by a concave mirror. Now we shall
study the formation of image by a convex mirror.
We consider two positions of the object for studying the image formed
by a convex mirror. First is when the object is at infinity and the second
position is when the object is at a finite distance from the mirror. The ray
diagrams for the formation of image by a convex mirror for these two
positions of the object are shown in Fig.9.8 (a) and (b), respectively. The
results are summarised in Table 9.2.

You have so far studied the image formation by a plane mirror, a
concave mirror and a convex mirror. Which of these mirrors will give the
full image of a large object? Let us explore through an Activity.
You can see a full-length image of a tall building/tree in a small
convex mirror. One such mirror is fitted in a wall of Agra Fort facing Taj
Mahal. If you visit the Agra Fort, try to observe the full image of Taj
Mahal. To view distinctly, you should stand suitably at the terrace
adjoining the wall.
Uses of convex mirrors
Convex mirrors are commonly used as rear-view (wing) mirrors in
vehicles. These mirrors are fitted on the sides of the vehicle, enabling the
driver to see traffic behind him/her to facilitate safe driving. Convex
mirrors are preferred because they always give an erect, though
diminished, image. Also, they have a wider field of view as they are curved
outwards. Thus, convex mirrors enable the driver to view much larger
area than would be possible with a plane mirror.
