 Refraction by Spherical Lenses

You might have seen watchmakers using a small magnifying glass to
see tiny parts. Have you ever touched the surface of a magnifying glass
with your hand? Is it plane surface or curved? Is it thicker in the middle
or at the edges? The glasses used in spectacles and that by a watchmaker
are examples of lenses. What is a lens? How does it bend light rays? We
shall discuss these in this section.
A transparent material bound by two surfaces, of which one or both
surfaces are spherical, forms a lens. This means
that a lens is bound by at least one spherical
surface. In such lenses, the other surface would
be plane. A lens may have two spherical
surfaces, bulging outwards. Such a lens is called
a double convex lens. It is simply called a convex
lens. It is thicker at the middle as compared to
the edges. Convex lens converges light rays as
shown in Fig. 9.12 (a). Hence convex lenses are
also called converging lenses. Similarly, a double
concave lens is bounded by two spherical
surfaces, curved inwards. It is thicker at the
edges than at the middle. Such lenses diverge
light rays as shown in Fig. 9.12 (b). Such lenses
are also called diverging lenses. A double concave
lens is simply called a concave lens.
A lens, either a convex lens or a concave lens,
has two spherical surfaces. Each of these surfaces
forms a part of a sphere. The centres of these
spheres are called centres of curvature of the lens.
The centre of curvature of a lens is usually
represented by the letter C. Since there are two
centres of curvature, we may represent them as C1
 and C2
. An imaginary
straight line passing through the two centres of curvature of a lens is
called its principal axis. The central point of a lens is its optical centre. It is usually represented by the letter O. A ray of light through the optical
centre of a lens passes without suffering any deviation. The effective
diameter of the circular outline of a spherical lens is called its aperture.
We shall confine our discussion in this Chapter to such lenses whose
aperture is much less than its radius of curvature and the two centres of
curvatures are equidistant from the optical centre O. Such lenses are
called thin lenses with small apertures. What happens when parallel rays
of light are incident on a lens? Let us do an Activity to understand this.

The paper begins to burn producing smoke. It may even catch fire
after a while. Why does this happen? The light from the Sun constitutes
parallel rays of light. These rays were converged by the lens at the sharp
bright spot formed on the paper. In fact, the bright spot you got on the
paper is a real image of the Sun. The concentration of the sunlight at a
point generated heat. This caused the paper to burn.
Now, we shall consider rays of light parallel to the principal axis of a
lens. What happens when you pass such rays of light through a lens?
This is illustrated for a convex lens in Fig.9.12 (a) and for a concave lens
in Fig.9.12 (b).
Observe Fig.9.12 (a) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the
principal axis are falling on a convex lens. These rays, after refraction
from the lens, are converging to a point on the principal axis. This point
on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the lens. Let us see
now the action of a concave lens.
Observe Fig.9.12 (b) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the
principal axis are falling on a concave lens. These rays, after refraction
from the lens, are appearing to diverge from a point on the principal
axis. This point on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the
concave lens.
If you pass parallel rays from the opposite surface of the lens, you
get another principal focus on the opposite side. Letter F is usually used
to represent principal focus. However, a lens has two principal foci. They
are represented by F1
 and F2
. The distance of the principal focus from
the optical centre of a lens is called its focal length. The letter f is used to
represent the focal length. How can you find the focal length of a convex
lens? Recall the Activity 9.11. In this Activity, the distance between the
position of the lens and the position of the image of the Sun gives the
approximate focal length of the lens.