Extracting Metals in the Middle of the Activity Series

The metals in the middle of the activity series such as iron, zinc, lead,
copper, are moderately reactive. These are usually present as sulphides
or carbonates in nature. It is easier to obtain a metal from its oxide, as
compared to its sulphides and carbonates. Therefore, prior to reduction,
the metal sulphides and carbonates must be converted into metal
oxides. The sulphide ores are converted into oxides by heating strongly
in the presence of excess air. This process is known as roasting. The
carbonate ores are changed into oxides by heating strongly in limited
air. This process is known as calcination. The chemical reaction that
takes place during roasting and calcination of zinc ores can be shown
as follows –
Roasting:
2ZnS(s) + 3O2(g) --Heat--> 2ZnO(s) + 2SO2(g)

Calcination:
ZnCO3(s) --Heat--> ZnO(s) + CO2(g)

The metal oxides are then reduced to the corresponding metals by 
using suitable reducing agents such as carbon. For example, when zinc 
oxide is heated with carbon, it is reduced to metallic zinc.

ZnO(s) + C(s) → Zn(s) + CO(g)

You are already familiar with the process of oxidation and reduction
explained in the first Chapter. Obtaining metals from their compounds
is also a reduction process.
Besides using carbon (coke) to reduce metal oxides to metals,
sometimes displacement reactions can also be used. The highly reactive
metals such as sodium, calcium, aluminium, etc., are used as reducing
agents because they can displace metals of lower reactivity from their
compounds. For example, when manganese dioxide is heated with
aluminium powder, the following reaction takes place –
3MnO2(s) + 4Al(s) → 3Mn(l) + 2Al2O3(s) + Heat

Can you identify the substances that are getting oxidised
and reduced?
These displacement reactions are highly exothermic. The
amount of heat evolved is so large that the metals are produced
in the molten state. In fact, the reaction of iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3
)
with aluminium is used to join railway tracks or cracked
machine parts. This reaction is known as the thermit reaction.

Fe2O3(s) + 2Al(s) → 2Fe(l) + Al2O3(s) + Heat



