What happens when Metals are burnt in Air?
You have seen in Activity 3.8 that magnesium burns in air with a dazzling
white flame.

Almost all metals combine with oxygen to form metal oxides.

Metal + Oxygen → Metal oxide

For example, when copper is heated in air, it combines with oxygen 
to form copper(II) oxide, a black oxide.

2Cu + O2 → 2CuO
(Copper)      (Copper(II) oxide)

Similarly, aluminium forms aluminium oxide.

4Al + 3O2 → 2Al2O3
(Aluminium)      (Aluminium oxide)

Recall from Chapter 2 how copper oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid. 
We have learnt that metal oxides are basic in nature. But some metal 
oxides, such as aluminium oxide and zinc oxide, show both acidic as 
well as basic behaviour. Such metal oxides which react with both acids 
as well as bases to produce salts and water are known as amphoteric oxides.

Aluminium oxide reacts in the following manner with acids and bases –

Al2O3 + 6HCl → 2AlCl3 + 3H2O

Al2O3 + 2NaOH → 2NaAlO2 + H2O
(Sodium aluminate)

Most metal oxides are insoluble in water, but some of these dissolve 
in water to form alkalis. Sodium oxide and potassium oxide dissolve in 
water to produce alkalis as follows –

Na2O(s) + H2O(l) → 2NaOH(aq)

K2O(s) + H2O(l) → 2KOH(aq)

We have observed in Activity 3.9 that all metals do not react with
oxygen at the same rate. Different metals show different reactivities
towards oxygen. Metals such as potassium and sodium react so
vigorously that they catch fire if kept in the open. Hence, to protect them
and to prevent accidental fires, they are kept immersed in kerosene oil.
At ordinary temperature, the surfaces of metals such as magnesium,
aluminium, zinc, lead, etc., are covered with a thin layer of oxide. The
protective oxide layer prevents the metal from further oxidation. Iron
does not burn on heating but iron filings burn vigorously when sprinkled
in the flame of the burner. Copper does not burn, but the hot metal is
coated with a black coloured layer of copper(II) oxide. Silver and gold do
not react with oxygen even at high temperatures.

After performing Activity 3.9, you must have observed that sodium
is the most reactive of the samples of metals taken here. The reaction of
magnesium is less vigorous implying that it is not as reactive as sodium.
But burning in oxygen does not help us to decide about the reactivity of
zinc, iron, copper or lead. Let us see some more reactions to arrive at a
conclusion about the order of reactivity of these metals.
