PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
3.1.1 Metals
The easiest way to start grouping substances is by comparing their
physical properties. Let us study this with the help of the following
activities. For performing Activities 3.1 to 3.6, collect the samples of
following metals – iron, copper, aluminium, magnesium, sodium, lead,
zinc and any other metal that is easily available.
You must have seen that the wires that carry current
in your homes have a coating of polyvinylchloride (PVC)
or a rubber-like material. Why are electric wires coated
with such substances?
What happens when metals strike a hard surface? Do they produce
a sound? The metals that produce a sound on striking a hard surface
are said to be sonorous. Can you now say why school bells are made of
metals?
3.1.2 Non-metals
In the previous Class you have learnt that there are very few non-metals
as compared to metals. Some of the examples of non-metals are carbon,
sulphur, iodine, oxygen, hydrogen, etc. The non-metals are either solids
or gases except bromine which is a liquid.
Do non-metals also have physical properties similar to that of metals?
Let us find out.
On the bases of the observations recorded in Table 3.1, discuss the
general physical properties of metals and non-metals in the class. You
must have concluded that we cannot group elements according to their
physical properties alone, as there are many exceptions. For example –
(i) All metals except mercury exist as solids at room temperature.
In Activity 3.5, you have observed that metals have high melting points but gallium and caesium have very low melting points.
These two metals will melt if you keep them on your palm.
(ii) Iodine is a non-metal but it is lustrous.
(iii) Carbon is a non-metal that can exist in different forms. Each
form is called an allotrope. Diamond, an allotrope of carbon, is
the hardest natural substance known and has a very high melting
and boiling point. Graphite, another allotrope of carbon, is a
conductor of electricity.
(iv) Alkali metals (lithium, sodium, potassium) are so soft that they
can be cut with a knife. They have low densities and low melting
points.
Elements can be more clearly classified as metals and non-metals
on the basis of their chemical properties.
