How can we try to find answers to our questions on our own?
Even though you may have not realised, you have already been finding answers to many of your questions. Suppose your pen stops writing. What would you do? You would ask yourself the question, "Why did my pen stop writing?" You might guess that the ink finished. You would then test this guess by opening the pen and checking the ink refill. If it is empty, you would know that your guess was correct. But suppose you found that the ink was not finished. Now what would you do? You would make another guess—perhaps the ink might have dried up. To test if this guess is correct or not, you will try something else. This is exactly how Science works! The way you tried to find out why your pen stopped writing is an example of the scientific method.

Science is not just about memorising facts and figures or doing experiments. It is about following a step-by-step process that helps us find answers to our questions. So what are the steps that we can follow? First, we observe something that we find interesting or we do not understand. This makes us wonder and perhaps think of a question about it. Then, we guess a possible answer to that question. We test this guess through experiments or more observations. We then try to analyse the results to see if it actually answers our question.


Scientists are people who follow the scientific method to solve problems or to discover new things. But anyone who follows the scientific method is working like a scientist. Someone cooking food may be wondering why the dal has spilled out of the cooker—was there too much water? Think of a bicycle repair person trying to find out why a tyre is flat—from where did the air leak out? Or an electrician trying to find why a light bulb is not working—is there some problem with the bulb or the switch? When we try to ask questions and find out answers, we are all, in a way, scientists! 


Do you now realise that there are several daily-life situations where we knowingly or unknowingly apply the scientific method? Though we all apply the scientific method to some extent, learning science will develop our capabilities for finding solutions to bigger problems and solving more mysteries of the universe. And to be able to learn science well, the first and foremost thing is to be curious and observe your surroundings keenly. And when we are curious, we start posing questions, asking how and why? Just remember, the world is full of things we do not know, things that are waiting to be explored.


Science is rarely done alone. Scientists across the world work together, often in large teams. So, if you cannot find an answer yourself, ask your friends to help you out! It is always more fun to discover things together. Of course, remember that you will not find answers to all your questions in Grade 6. Do not worry, you are embarking upon a journey of science for the next five years or even beyond! 


Much like children enjoying the rain, science is all about joyful exploration. Enjoy your scientific journey, keep exploring and never stop wondering about the amazing mysteries of the universe and asking questions. After all, to be a wise person, you must be a "whys" person! Are you ready to embark upon the exciting journey of science? Let us get started!! 


Activities:


Activity 1.1: Write about a similar problem that you tried to solve. What steps did you take? 


Activity 1.2: Describe a daily life situation where you think someone was following a scientific method.


Activity 1.3: If you have to ask "Why?" about something, what would you ask about? Try to write down how you would attempt to find an answer to your question.