Activity 5.1: Let us measure
Measure the length and width of the teacher's table in your classroom. Use your 'handspan' as a unit to measure the length and width of the table. Record your observations in Table 5.2.


Table 5.2: Measurement of length and width of a table 

Name of the student 

Number of handspans (Length) 

Number of handspans (Width) 

Activity 5.2: Let us measure
Measure the width of the classroom using your 'foot' as a unit of length. Record your observations in Table 5.3.


Table 5.3: Measurement of width of a classroom 

Name of the student 

Number of feet 

Activity 5.3: Let us find out
Measure the length of a desk in your classroom using a 15 cm scale from your geometry box. Now measure the same length using a metre scale. Compare the two measurements.

Activity 5.4: Let us measure
Use a thread to measure the length of the curved line AB (Fig. 5.10). Put a knot on the thread near one of its ends. Place this knot on the point A. Now, place a small portion of the thread along the line, keeping it taut using your fingers and thumbs. Hold the thread at this end point with one hand. Using the other hand, stretch a little more portion of the thread along the curved line. Go on repeating this process till the other end B of the curved line is reached. Make a mark on the thread where it touches the point B. Now stretch the thread along a metre scale. Measure the length between the knot in the beginning and the final mark on the thread. This gives the length of the curved line AB.

Activity 5.5: Let us record and find out
Think of some objects you have seen recently. List them in Table 5.4.


Table 5.4: Objects at rest and in motion 


Objects at rest: House, Table, Clock 


Objects in motion: A flying bird, Second's hand of a clock 

Activity 5.6: Let us find out
Select a place where you find ants. Try to put a small sugar crystal on the ground near an ant. Observe the ant as it moves towards the sugar crystal. Mark the positions of the ant at different intervals of time on the ground using a pencil or a piece of chalk. After some time, join the marks with lines. Does the ant move in a straight line? 

Activity 5.7: Let us observe
Take a stone, tie a thread to it and whirl it with your hand. Observe the motion of the stone. We see that the stone moves along a circular path. In this motion, the distance of the stone from your hand remains the same. This is an example of circular motion