EXCRETION CRETION
We have already discussed how organisms get rid of gaseous wastes
generated during photosynthesis or respiration. Other metabolic activities
generate nitrogenous materials which need to be removed. The biological
process involved in the removal of these harmful metabolic wastes from
the body is called excretion. Different organisms use varied strategies to
do this. Many unicellular organisms remove these wastes by simple
diffusion from the body surface into the surrounding
water. As we have seen in other processes, complex
multi-cellular organisms use specialised organs to
perform the same function.
5.5.1 Excretion in Human Beings
The excretory system of human beings (Fig. 5.13)
includes a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a urinary
bladder and a urethra. Kidneys are located in the
abdomen, one on either side of the backbone. Urine
produced in the kidneys passes through the ureters
into the urinary bladder where it is stored until it is
released through the urethra.
How is urine produced? The purpose of making
urine is to filter out waste products from the blood.
Just as CO2
 is removed from the blood in the lungs,
nitrogenous waste such as urea or uric acid are
removed from blood in the kidneys. It is then no
surprise that the basic filtration unit in the kidneys,like in the lungs, is a cluster of very thin-walled blood
capillaries. Each capillary cluster in the kidney is
associated with the cup-shaped end of a coiled tube
called Bowman’s capsule that collects the filtrate
 (Fig. 5.14). Each kidney has large numbers of these
filtration units called nephrons packed close together.
Some substances in the initial filtrate, such as glucose,
amino acids, salts and a major amount of water, are
selectively re-absorbed as the urine flows along the tube.
The amount of water re-absorbed depends on how much
excess water there is in the body, and on how much of
dissolved waste there is to be excreted. The urine forming
in each kidney eventually enters a long tube, the ureter,
which connects the kidneys with the urinary bladder.
Urine is stored in the urinary bladder until the pressure
of the expanded bladder leads to the urge to pass it out
through the urethra. The bladder is muscular, so it is
under nervous control, as we have discussed elsewhere.
As a result, we can usually control the urge to urinate.