 TRANSPORTATION

We have seen in previous sections that blood transports food, oxygen
and waste materials in our bodies. In Class IX, we learnt about blood
being a fluid connective tissue. Blood consists of a fluid medium called
plasma in which the cells are suspended. Plasma transports food, carbon
dioxide and nitrogenous wastes in dissolved form. Oxygen is carried by
the red blood corpuscles. Many other substances like salts, are also
transported by the blood. We thus need a pumping organ to push blood
around the body, a network of tubes to reach all the tissues and a system
in place to ensure that this network can be repaired if damaged.The heart is a muscular organ which is
as big as our fist (Fig. 5.10). Because
both oxygen and carbon dioxide have to
be transported by the blood, the heart
has different chambers to prevent the
oxygen-rich blood from mixing with the
blood containing carbon dioxide. The
carbon dioxide-rich blood has to reach
the lungs for the carbon dioxide to be
removed, and the oxygenated blood from
the lungs has to be brought back to the
heart. This oxygen-rich blood is then
pumped to the rest of the body.
We can follow this process step by
step (Fig. 5.11). Oxygen-rich blood from
the lungs comes to the thin-walled upper
chamber of the heart on the left, the left atrium. The left atrium relaxes
when it is collecting this blood. It then contracts, while the next chamber,
the left ventricle, relaxes, so that the blood is transferred to it. When the
muscular left ventricle contracts in its turn, the blood is pumped out to
the body. De-oxygenated blood comes from the body to the upper
chamber on the right, the right atrium, as it relaxes. As the right atrium
contracts, the corresponding lower chamber, the right ventricle, dilates.
This transfers blood to the right ventricle, which in turn pumps it to the
lungs for oxygenation. Since ventricles have to pump blood into various
organs, they have thicker muscular walls than the atria do. Valves ensure
that blood does not flow backwards when the atria or ventricles contract.

Oxygen enters the blood in the lungs
The separation of the right side and the left side of
the heart is useful to keep oxygenated and deoxygenated blood from mixing. Such separation
allows a highly efficient supply of oxygen to the
body. This is useful in animals that have high
energy needs, such as birds and mammals, which
constantly use energy to maintain their body
temperature. In animals that do not use energy
for this purpose, the body temperature depends
on the temperature in the environment. Such
animals, like amphibians or many reptiles have
three-chambered hearts, and tolerate some mixing
of the oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood
streams. Fishes, on the other hand, have only two
chambers to their hearts, and the blood is pumped
to the gills, is oxygenated there, and passes directly
to the rest of the body. Thus, blood goes only once
through the heart in the fish during one cycle of
passage through the body. On the other hand, it goes through the heart
twice during each cycle in other vertebrates. This is known as double
circulation.

The tubes – blood vessels
Arteries are the vessels which carry blood away from the heart to various
organs of the body. Since the blood emerges from the heart under high
pressure, the arteries have thick, elastic walls. Veins collect the blood
from different organs and bring it back to the heart. They do not need
thick walls because the blood is no longer under pressure, instead they
have valves that ensure that the blood flows only in one direction.
On reaching an organ or tissue, the artery divides into smaller and
smaller vessels to bring the blood in contact with all the individual cells.
The smallest vessels have walls which are one-cell thick and are called
capillaries. Exchange of material between the blood and surrounding
cells takes place across this thin wall. The capillaries then join together
to form veins that convey the blood away from the organ or tissue.
Maintenance by platelets
What happens if this system of tubes develops a leak? Think about
situations when we are injured and start bleeding. Naturally the loss of
blood from the system has to be minimised. In addition, leakage would
lead to a loss of pressure which would reduce the efficiency of the pumping system. To avoid this, the blood has platelet cells which circulate
around the body and plug these leaks by helping to clot the blood at
these points of injury.
Lymph
There is another type of fluid also involved in transportation. This is
called lymph or tissue fluid. Through the pores present in the walls of
capillaries some amount of plasma, proteins and blood cells escape into
intercellular spaces in the tissues to form the tissue fluid or lymph. It is
similar to the plasma of blood but colourless and contains less protein.
Lymph drains into lymphatic capillaries from the intercellular spaces,
which join to form large lymph vessels that finally open into larger veins.
Lymph carries digested and absorbed fat from intestine and drains excess
fluid from extra cellular space back into the blood.
