Autotrophic Nutrition
Carbon and energy requirements of the autotrophic organism are
fulfilled by photosynthesis. It is the process by which autotrophs take
in substances from the outside and convert them into stored forms of
energy. This material is taken in the form of carbon dioxide and water
which is converted into carbohydrates in the presence of sunlight and
chlorophyll. Carbohydrates are utilised for providing energy to the plant.
We will study how this takes place in the next section. The carbohydrates
which are not used immediately are stored in the form of starch, which
serves as the internal energy reserve to be used as and when required
by the plant. A somewhat similar situation is seen in us where some of
the energy derived from the food we eat is stored in our body in the form
of glycogen.

Let us now see what actually happens during the process of
photosynthesis. The following events occur during this process –

(i) Absorption of light energy by
chlorophyll.
(ii) Conversion of light energy to chemical
energy and splitting of water molecules
into hydrogen and oxygen.
(iii) Reduction of carbon dioxide to
carbohydrates.
These steps need not take place one after
the other immediately. For example, desert
plants take up carbon dioxide at night and
prepare an intermediate which is acted upon
by the energy absorbed by the chlorophyll
during the day.
Let us see how each of the components of
the above reaction are necessary for
photosynthesis.
If you carefully observe a cross-section of a
leaf under the microscope (shown in Fig. 5.1),
you will notice that some cells contain green
dots. These green dots are cell organelles called
chloroplasts which contain chlorophyll. Let us
do an activity which demonstrates that
chlorophyll is essential for photosynthesis.

Now, let us study how the plant
obtains carbon dioxide. In Class IX,
we had talked about stomata (Fig. 5.3)
which are tiny pores present on the
surface of the leaves. Massive amounts
of gaseous exchange takes place in the
leaves through these pores for the
purpose of photosynthesis. But it is
important to note here that exchange
of gases occurs across the surface of
stems, roots and leaves as well. Since
large amounts of water can also be lost
through these stomata, the plant
closes these pores when it does not
need carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. The opening and closing of the
pore is a function of the guard cells. The guard cells swell when water
flows into them, causing the stomatal pore to open. Similarly the pore
closes if the guard cells shrink.


Based on the two activities performed above, can we design an
experiment to demonstrate that sunlight is essential for photosynthesis?
So far, we have talked about how autotrophs meet their energy
requirements. But they also need other raw materials for building their
body. Water used in photosynthesis is taken up from the soil by the
roots in terrestrial plants. Other materials like nitrogen, phosphorus,
iron and magnesium are taken up from the soil. Nitrogen is an essential
element used in the synthesis of proteins and other compounds. This is
taken up in the form of inorganic nitrates or nitrites. Or it is taken up as
organic compounds which have been prepared by bacteria from
atmospheric nitrogen.