 Homologous Series
You have seen that carbon atoms can be linked together to form chains
of varying lengths. These chains can be branched also. In addition,
hydrogen atom or other atoms on these carbon chains can be replaced
by any of the functional groups that we saw above. The presence of a
functional group such as alcohol decides the properties of the carbon
compound, regardless of the length of the carbon chain. For example,
the chemical properties of CH3OH, C2H5OH, C3H7OH and C4H9OH are all
very similar. Hence, such a series of compounds in which the same
functional group substitutes for hydrogen in a carbon chain is called a
homologous series.
Let us look at the homologous series that we saw earlier in Table
4.2. If we look at the formulae of successive compounds, say –
CH4 and C2H6 — these differ by a –CH2- unit
C2H6
and C3H8 — these differ by a –CH2
- unit
What is the difference between the next pair – propane and butane (C4H10)?
Can you find out the difference in molecular masses between these
pairs (the atomic mass of carbon is 12 u and the atomic mass of hydrogen
is 1 u)?
Similarly, take the homologous series for alkenes. The first member
of the series is ethene which we have already come across in
Section 4.2.1. What is the formula for ethene? The succeeding members
have the formula C3H6
, C4H8
 and C5H10. Do these also differ by a –CH2unit? Do you see any relation between the number of carbon and
hydrogen atoms in these compounds? The general formula for alkenes
can be written as CnH2n, where n = 2, 3, 4. Can you similarly generate the
general formula for alkanes and alkynes?
As the molecular mass increases in any homologous series, a
gradation in physical properties is seen. This is because the melting and
boiling points increase with increasing molecular mass. Other physical
properties such as solubility in a particular solvent also show a similar
gradation. But the chemical properties, which are determined solely by
the functional group, remain similar in a homologous series.
–