BONDING IN CARBON – THE COVALENT BOND
In the previous Chapter, we have studied the properties of ionic
compounds. We saw that ionic compounds have high melting and boiling
points and conduct electricity in solution or in the molten state. We also saw how the nature of bonding in ionic compounds explains these
properties. Let us now study the properties of some carbon compounds.
Most carbon compounds are poor conductors of electricity as we
have seen in Chapter 2. From the data
given in Table 4.1 on the boiling and
melting points of the carbon compounds,
we find that these compounds have low
melting and boiling points as compared
to ionic compounds (Chapter 3). We can
conclude that the forces of attraction
between the molecules are not very
strong. Since these compounds are
largely non-conductors of electricity, we
can conclude that the bonding in these
compounds does not give rise to any ions.
In Class IX, we learnt about the
combining capacity of various elements and how it depends on the
number of valence electrons. Let us now look at the electronic
configuration of carbon. The atomic number of carbon is 6. What would
be the distribution of electrons in various shells of carbon? How many
valence electrons will carbon have?
We know that the reactivity of elements is explained as their tendency
to attain a completely filled outer shell, that is, attain noble gas
configuration. Elements forming ionic compounds achieve this by either
gaining or losing electrons from the outermost shell. In the case of carbon,
it has four electrons in its outermost shell and needs to gain or lose four
electrons to attain noble gas configuration. If it were to gain or lose
electrons –
(i) It could gain four electrons forming C4– anion. But it would be difficult
for the nucleus with six protons to hold on to ten electrons, that is,
four extra electrons.
(ii) It could lose four electrons forming C4+ cation. But it would require
a large amount of energy to remove four electrons leaving behind a
carbon cation with six protons in its nucleus holding on to just two
electrons.
Carbon overcomes this problem by sharing its valence electrons with
other atoms of carbon or with atoms of other elements. Not just carbon,
but many other elements form molecules by sharing electrons in this
manner. The shared electrons ‘belong’ to the outermost shells of both
the atoms and lead to both atoms attaining the noble gas configuration.
Before going on to compounds of carbon, let us look at some simple
molecules formed by the sharing of valence electrons.
The simplest molecule formed in this manner is that of hydrogen.
As you have learnt earlier, the atomic number of hydrogen is 1. Hence
hydrogen has one electron in its K shell and it requires one more electron
to fill the K shell. So two hydrogen atoms share their electrons to form a
molecule of hydrogen, H2
. This allows each hydrogen atom to attain the electronic configuration of the nearest noble gas,
helium, which has two electrons in its K shell. We can
depict this using dots or crosses to represent valence
electrons (Fig. 4.1).
The shared pair of electrons is said to constitute a
single covalent bond between the two hydrogen atoms.
A single covalent bond is also represented by a line
between the two atoms, as shown in Fig. 4.2.
The atomic number of chlorine is 17. What would be its electronic
configuration and its valency? Chlorine forms a diatomic molecule, Cl2
.
Can you draw the electron dot structure for this molecule? Note that
only the valence shell electrons need to be depicted.
In the case of oxygen, we see the formation of a double bond between
two oxygen atoms. This is because an atom of oxygen has six electrons
in its L shell (the atomic number of oxygen is eight) and it requires two
more electrons to complete its octet. So each atom of oxygen shares two
electrons with another atom of oxygen to give us the structure shown in
Fig. 4.3. The two electrons contributed by each oxygen atom give rise to
two shared pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a double bond
between the two atoms.
Can you now depict a molecule of water showing the nature
of bonding between one oxygen atom and two hydrogen
atoms? Does the molecule have single bonds or double bonds?
What would happen in the case of a diatomic molecule of
nitrogen? Nitrogen has the atomic number 7. What would be
its electronic configuration and its combining capacity? In
order to attain an octet, each nitrogen atom in a molecule of
nitrogen contributes three electrons giving rise to three shared
pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a triple bond
between the two atoms. The electron dot structure of N2
 and
its triple bond can be depicted as in Fig. 4.4.
A molecule of ammonia has the formula NH3
. Can you draw
the electron dot structure for this molecule showing how all
four atoms achieve noble gas configuration? Will the molecule
have single, double or triple bonds?
Let us now take a look at methane, which is a compound
of carbon. Methane is widely used as a fuel and is a major
component of bio-gas and Compressed Natural Gas (CNG). It
is also one of the simplest compounds formed by carbon.
Methane has a formula CH4
. Hydrogen, as you know, has a
valency of 1. Carbon is tetravalent because it has four valence
electrons. In order to achieve noble gas configuration, carbon
shares these electrons with four atoms of hydrogen as shown
in Fig. 4.5.
Such bonds which are formed by the sharing of an electron pair
between two atoms are known as covalent bonds. Covalently bonded
molecules are seen to have strong bonds within the molecule, but intermolecular forces are weak. This gives rise to the low melting and boiling points of these compounds. Since the electrons are shared between
atoms and no charged particles are formed, such covalent compounds
are generally poor conductors of electricity.
