Properties of Ethanoic Acid
Ethanoic acid is commonly called acetic acid and
belongs to a group of acids called carboxylic
acids. 5-8% solution of acetic acid in water is
called vinegar and is used widely as a preservative
in pickles. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid
is 290 K and hence it often freezes during winter
in cold climates. This gave rise to its name glacial
acetic acid.
The group of organic compounds called
carboxylic acids are obviously characterised by
their acidic nature. However, unlike mineral acids
like HCl, which are completely ionised, carboxylic 
acids are weak acids.


Reactions of Ethanoic Acid:

(i) Esterification Reaction:

Esters are most commonly formed by the reaction of an acid and an alcohol.

Ethanoic acid reacts with absolute ethanol in the presence of an acid catalyst 
(concentrated H2SO4) to give an ester.

CH3COOH + CH3CH2OH  --(Conc. H2SO4)-->  CH3COOCH2CH3 + H2O

(Ethanoic acid)   (Ethanol)              (Ester)

Generally, esters are sweet-smelling substances. These are used in making 
perfumes and as flavouring agents.

On treating the ester with sodium hydroxide (an alkali), it is converted back 
to alcohol and the sodium salt of the carboxylic acid. This reaction is known 
as saponification because it is used in the preparation of soap.

CH3COOCH2CH3 + NaOH  →  CH3COONa + CH3CH2OH

Soaps are sodium or potassium salts of long chain carboxylic acid.
CH3COOC2H5 + NaOH  →  C2H5OH + CH3COONa
(Ester)               (Ethanol)  (Sodium ethanoate)

(ii) Reaction with a Base:

Like mineral acids, ethanoic acid reacts with a base such as sodium 
hydroxide to give a salt (sodium ethanoate, commonly called sodium acetate) 
and water.

NaOH + CH3COOH  →  CH3COONa + H2O

(iii) Reaction with Carbonates and Hydrogencarbonates:

Ethanoic acid reacts with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates to give 
a salt, carbon dioxide, and water. The salt produced is sodium acetate.

2CH3COOH + Na2CO3  →  2CH3COONa + H2O + CO2

CH3COOH + NaHCO3  →  CH3COONa + H2O + CO2


