How do these Traits get Expressed?
How does the mechanism of heredity work? Cellular DNA is
the information source for making proteins in the cell. A section
of DNA that provides information for one protein is called the
gene for that protein. How do proteins control the
characteristics that we are discussing here? Let us take the
example of tallness as a characteristic. We know that plants
have hormones that can trigger growth. Plant height can thus
depend on the amount of a particular plant hormone. The
amount of the plant hormone made will depend on the
efficiency of the process for making it. Consider now an enzyme
that is important for this process. If this enzyme works
efficiently, a lot of hormone will be made, and the plant will be
tall. If the gene for that enzyme has an alteration that makes
the enzyme less efficient, the amount of hormone will be less,
and the plant will be short. Thus, genes control characteristics,
or traits.
If the interpretations of Mendelian experiments we have been
discussing are correct, then both parents must be contributing
equally to the DNA of the progeny during sexual reproduction.
We have disscussed this issue in the previous Chapter. If both
parents can help determine the trait in the progeny, both parents
must be contributing a copy of the same gene. This means that
each pea plant must have two sets of all genes, one inherited from
each parent. For this mechanism to work, each germ cell must
have only one gene set.
How do germ-cells make a single set of genes from the normal two
copies that all other cells in the body have? If progeny plants inherited a
single whole gene set from each parent, then the experiment explained
in Fig. 8.5 cannot work. This is because the two characteristics ‘R’ and
‘y’ would then be linked to each other and cannot be independently.inherited. This is explained by the fact that each gene set is present, not
as a single long thread of DNA, but as separate independent pieces,
each called a chromosome. Thus, each cell will have two copies of each
chromosome, one each from the male and female parents. Every germcell will take one chromosome from each pair and these may be of either
maternal or paternal origin. When two germ cells combine, they will
restore the normal number of chromosomes in the progeny, ensuring
the stability of the DNA of the species. Such a mechanism of inheritance
explains the results of the Mendel experiments, and is used by all
sexually reproducing organisms. But asexually reproducing organisms
also follow similar rules of inheritance. Can we work out how their
inheritance might work?