2.2 How to Group Plants and Animals?
How would you arrange your books and notebooks in groups? Would arranging them in groups help you better organise your school bag? Now, let us look at the world around us. We are surrounded by a variety of plants and animals with different features about which you have learnt in section 2.1. We can group them based on similarities and differences among them.


What is the importance of grouping? Grouping makes it easier to understand and study plants and animals on the basis of their similarities and differences. You will learn more about the importance of grouping in our daily lives in the chapter, 'Materials Around Us'

2.2.1 How to group plants?
You must have noticed that plants show variation in the features related to stems, leaves, flowers, and more. The stems of different plants vary in thickness, height, and hardness, while the leaves vary in shape, colour, size and arrangement. You might have also learnt in earlier classes that plants can be grouped into herbs, shrubs, and trees based on their height and types of stem.


Some plants are typically small with soft and green stems. These are known as herbs. For example, a tomato plant is a herb. Some plants are not as tall as trees. These plants often have many brown woody stems that start branching very close to the ground. These stems are hard but not as thick as the stem of a tree. These plants are called shrubs. For example, a rose plant is a shrub. Some plants grow really tall and have hard, thick, brown, and woody stems. Their branches typically start higher up on the stem and away from the ground. These plants are called trees. For example, a mango tree.


Some plants with weak stems need support to climb and grow, and are called climbers. Some plants creep along the ground and are called creepers.


You may observe thin lines on the leaves of the plants. These are veins. The pattern of veins on the leaf is called venation. In some leaves, you can observe a net-like pattern of veins on both sides of a thick middle vein. This pattern is called reticulate venation. For example, leaves of hibiscus exhibit reticulate venation. In some leaves, you may observe that the veins run parallel. This pattern is called parallel venation. For example, the leaves of banana plants and grasses exhibit parallel venation.


The roots of some plants consist of one main root and small side roots arising from it. The main root is called taproot. The roots of other plants appear as a bunch of similar-sized thin roots arising from the base of the stem. Such roots are called fibrous roots. Generally, plants with reticulate venation have taproots while those with parallel venation have fibrous roots.


Each part of a split seed is called a cotyledon. Plants that have seeds with two cotyledons are called dicotyledons (dicots). Plants with seeds having a single thin cotyledon are called monocotyledons (monocots). Dicot plants have reticulate venation and a taproot system while monocot plants have parallel venation and a fibrous root system.

2.2.2 How to group animals?
Different animals have different types of movement. Animals can fly, run, crawl, walk, hop or jump, and so on. They use different body parts for moving from one place to another. They may use wings, legs, and other parts that help them to move.