 ELECTRIC CURRENT AND CIRCUIT

We are familiar with air current and water current. We know that flowing
water constitute water current in rivers. Similarly, if the electric charge
flows through a conductor (for example, through a metallic wire), we
say that there is an electric current in the conductor. In a torch, we
know that the cells (or a battery, when placed in proper order) provide
flow of charges or an electric current through the torch bulb to glow. We
have also seen that the torch gives light only when its switch is on. What
does a switch do? A switch makes a conducting link between the cell and
the bulb. A continuous and closed path of an electric current is called an
electric circuit. Now, if the circuit is broken anywhere (or the switch of the
torch is turned off), the current stops flowing and the bulb does not glow.
How do we express electric current? Electric current is expressed by
the amount of charge flowing through a particular area in unit time. In
other words, it is the rate of flow of electric charges. In circuits using
metallic wires, electrons constitute the flow of charges. However, electrons
were not known at the time when the phenomenon of electricity was first
observed. So, electric current was considered to be the flow of positive
charges and the direction of flow of positive charges was taken to be the
direction of electric current. Conventionally, in an electric circuit the
direction of electric current is taken as opposite to the direction of the
flow of electrons, which are negative charges.

If a net charge Q, flows across any cross-section of a conductor in
time t, then the current I, through the cross-section is

I=Q/t

The SI unit of electric charge is coulomb (C), which is equivalent to
the charge contained in nearly 6 × 1018 electrons. (We know that an
electron possesses a negative charge of 1.6 × 10–19 C.) The electric
current is expressed by a unit called ampere (A), named after the
French scientist, Andre-Marie Ampere (1775–1836). One ampere is
constituted by the flow of one coulomb of charge per second, that is,
1 A = 1 C/1 s. Small quantities of current are expressed in milliampere
(1 mA = 10–3 A) or in microampere (1 µA = 10–6 A).
An instrument called ammeter measures electric
current in a circuit. It is always connected in series
in a circuit through which the current is to be
measured. Figure 11.1 shows the schematic
diagram of a typical electric circuit comprising a
cell, an electric bulb, an ammeter and a plug key.
Note that the electric current flows in the circuit
from the positive terminal of the cell to the negative
terminal of the cell through the bulb and ammeter.

Example 11.1
A current of 0.5 A is drawn by a filament of an electric bulb for 10
minutes. Find the amount of electric charge that flows through the
circuit.
Solution
We are given, I = 0.5 A; t = 10 min = 600 s.
From Eq. (11.1), we have
Q = It
= 0.5 A × 600 s
= 300 C
