 OHM’S LAW
Is there a relationship between the potential difference across a conductor
and the current through it? Let us explore with an Activity.
Activity 11.1
n Set up a circuit as shown in Fig. 11.2,
consisting of a nichrome wire XY of length,
say 0.5 m, an ammeter, a voltmeter and
four cells of 1.5 V each. (Nichrome is an
alloy of nickel, chromium, manganese, and
iron metals.)
n First use only one cell as the source in the
circuit. Note the reading in the ammeter I,
for the current and reading of the voltmeter
V for the potential difference across the
nichrome wire XY in the circuit. Tabulate
them in the Table given.
n Next connect two cells in the circuit and
note the respective readings of the ammeter and voltmeter for the values of current through
the nichrome wire and potential difference across the nichrome wire.
n Repeat the above steps using three cells and then four cells in the circuit separately.
n Calculate the ratio of V to I for each pair of potential difference V and current I.

In this Activity, you will find that approximately the
same value for V/I is obtained in each case. Thus the V–I
graph is a straight line that passes through the origin of
the graph, as shown in Fig. 11.3. Thus, V/I is a constant
ratio.
In 1827, a German physicist Georg Simon Ohm
(1787–1854) found out the relationship between the current
I, flowing in a metallic wire and the potential difference
across its terminals. The potential difference, V, across the
ends of a given metallic wire in an electric circuit is directly
proportional to the current flowing through it, provided its
temperature remains the same. This is called Ohm’s law. In
other words –
V ∝ I (11.4)
or V/I = constant
= R
or V = IR (11.5)
In Eq. (11.4), R is a constant for the given metallic wire
at a given temperature and is called its resistance. It is the
property of a conductor to resist the flow of charges through it. Its SI
unit is ohm, represented by the Greek letter Ω. According to Ohm’s law,
R = V/I (11.6)
If the potential difference across the two ends of a conductor is 1 V
and the current through it is 1 A, then the resistance R, of the conductor
is 1 Ω. That is, 1 ohm = 1 volt
1 ampere
Also from Eq. (11.5) we get
I = V/R (11.7)
It is obvious from Eq. (11.7) that the current through a resistor is
inversely proportional to its resistance. If the resistance is doubled the
current gets halved. In many practical cases it is necessary to increase
or decrease the current in an electric circuit. A component used to
regulate current without changing the voltage source is called variable
resistance. In an electric circuit, a device called rheostat is often used to
change the resistance in the circuit. We will now study about electrical
resistance of a conductor with the help of following Activity.