DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION

Sometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation.
In such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and
comfortably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects
of the eye.
There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision. These
are (i) myopia or near -sightedness, (ii) Hypermetropia or far -
sightedness, and (iii) Presbyopia. These defects can be corrected by
the use of suitable spherical lenses. We discuss below these defects
and their correction.

(a) Myopia
Myopia is also known as near -
sightedness. A person with myopia
can see nearby objects clearly but
cannot see distant objects distinctly.
A person with this defect has the far
point nearer than infinity. Such a
person may see clearly upto a
distance of a few metres. In a myopic
eye, the image of a distant object is
formed in front of the retina [Fig.
10.2 (b)] and not at the retina itself.
This defect may arise due to (i)
excessive curvature of the eye lens,
or (ii) elongation of the eyeball. This
defect can be corrected by using a
concave lens of suitable power. This
is illustrated in Fig. 10.2 (c). A
concave lens of suitable power will
bring the image back on to the
retina and thus the defect is corrected.
(b) Hypermetropia
Hypermetropia is also known as far-sightedness.
A person with hypermetropia can see distant
objects clearly but cannot see nearby objects
distinctly. The near point, for the person, is farther
away from the normal near point (25 cm). Such a
person has to keep a reading material much
beyond 25 cm from the eye for comfortable
reading. This is because the light rays from a
closeby object are focussed at a point behind the
retina as shown in Fig. 10.3 (b). This defect arises
either because (i) the focal length of the eye lens is
too long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too small.
This defect can be corrected by using a convex
lens of appropriate power. This is illustrated in
Fig. 10.3 (c). Eye-glasses with converging lenses
provide the additional focussing power required
for forming the image on the retina.
(c) Presbyopia
The power of accommodation of the eye usually
decreases with ageing. For most people, the near
point gradually recedes away. They find it difficult
to see nearby objects comfortably and distinctly
without corrective eye-glasses. This defect is
called Presbyopia. It arises due to the gradual weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the
eye lens. Sometimes, a person may suffer from both myopia and
hypermetropia. Such people often require bi-focal lenses. A common
type of bi-focal lenses consists of both concave and convex lenses.
The upper portion consists of a concave lens. It facilitates distant
vision. The lower part is a convex lens. It facilitates near vision.
 These days, it is possible to correct the refractive defects with
contact lenses or through surgical interventions.
