 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM
You have learnt how light gets refracted through a rectangular glass
slab. For parallel refracting surfaces, as in a glass slab, the emergent ray
is parallel to the incident ray. However, it is slightly displaced laterally.
How would light get refracted through a transparent prism? Consider a
triangular glass prism. It has two triangular bases and three rectangular
lateral surfaces. These surfaces are inclined to each other. The angle
between its two lateral faces is called the angle of the prism. Let us now
do an activity to study the refraction of light through a triangular glass
prism.

Activity 10.1

n Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.
n Place a glass prism on it in such a way that it rests on its triangular
base. Trace the outline of the prism using a pencil.
n Draw a straight line PE inclined to one of the refracting surfaces,
say AB, of the prism.
n Fix two pins, say at points P and Q, on the line PE as shown in
Fig. 10.4.
n Look for the images of the pins, fixed at P and Q, through the
other face AC.
n Fix two more pins, at points R and S, such that the pins at R and
S and the images of the pins at P and Q lie on the same straight
line.
n Remove the pins and the glass prism.
n The line PE meets the boundary of the prism at point E
(see Fig. 10.4). Similarly, join and produce the points R and S. Let
these lines meet the boundary of the prism at E and F, respectively.
Join E and F.
n Draw perpendiculars to the refracting surfaces AB and AC of the
prism at points E and F, respectively.
n Mark the angle of incidence (∠i), the angle of refraction (∠r) and
the angle of emergence (∠e) as shown in Fig. 10.4.

Here PE is the incident ray, EF is the refracted ray and FS is the
emergent ray. You may note that a ray of light is entering from air to
glass at the first surface AB. The light ray on refraction has bent towards
the normal. At the second surface AC, the light ray has entered from
glass to air. Hence it has bent away from normal. Compare the angle of
incidence and the angle of refraction at each refracting surface of the
prism. Is this similar to the kind of bending that occurs in a glass slab?
The peculiar shape of the prism makes the emergent ray bend at an
angle to the direction of the incident ray. This angle is called the angle of
deviation. In this case ∠D is the angle of deviation. Mark the angle of
deviation in the above activity and measure it.
