 Balanced Chemical Equations
Recall the law of conservation of mass that you studied in Class IX; mass
can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. That is, the
total mass of the elements present in the products of a chemical reaction
has to be equal to the total mass of the elements present in the reactants.
In other words, the number of atoms of each element remains the
same, before and after a chemical reaction. Hence, we need to balance a
skeletal chemical equation. Is the chemical Eq. (1.2) balanced? Let us
learn about balancing a chemical equation step by step.
The word-equation for Activity 1.3 may be represented as –
Zinc + Sulphuric acid → Zinc sulphate + Hydrogen
The above word-equation may be represented by the following
chemical equation –
Zn + H2SO4 → ZnSO4+ H2(1.3)

As the number of atoms of each element is the same on both sides of
the arrow, Eq. (1.3) is a balanced chemical equation.
Let us try to balance the following chemical equation –
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4+ H2

Step I: To balance a chemical equation, first draw boxes around each
formula. Do not change anything inside the boxes while balancing the
equation.
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4
 + H2
(1.5)
Step II: List the number of atoms of different elements present in the
unbalanced equation (1.5).
Step III: It is often convenient to start balancing with the compound
that contains the maximum number of atoms. It may be a reactant or a
product. In that compound, select the element which has the maximum
number of atoms. Using these criteria, we select Fe3O4
 and the element
oxygen in it. There are four oxygen atoms on the RHS and only one on
the LHS.
To balance the oxygen atoms –
To equalise the number of atoms, it must be remembered that we
cannot alter the formulae of the compounds or elements involved in the
reactions. For example, to balance oxygen atoms we can put coefficient
‘4’ as 4 H2O and not H2O4
 or (H2O)4
. Now the partly balanced equation
becomes –
Fe + 4 H2O → Fe3O4
 + H2
Step IV: Fe and H atoms are still not balanced. Pick any of these elements
to proceed further. Let us balance hydrogen atoms in the partly balanced
equation.
To equalise the number of H atoms, make the number of molecules
of hydrogen as four on the RHS.

The equation would be –
 Fe + 4 H2O → Fe3O4+ 4 H2

Step V: Examine the above equation and pick up the third element
which is not balanced. You find that only one element is left to be
balanced, that is, iron.

To equalise Fe, we take three atoms of Fe on the LHS.
3 Fe + 4 H2O → Fe3O4
 + 4 H2
(1.8)
Step VI: Finally, to check the correctness of the balanced equation, we
count atoms of each element on both sides of the equation.
3Fe + 4H2O → Fe3O4 + 4H2
The numbers of atoms of elements on both sides of Eq. (1.9) are
equal. This equation is now balanced. This method of balancing chemical
equations is called hit-and-trial method as we make trials to balance
the equation by using the smallest whole number coefficient.
Step VII: Writing Symbols of Physical States Carefully examine
the above balanced Eq. (1.9). Does this equation tell us anything about
the physical state of each reactant and product? No information has
been given in this equation about their physical states.
To make a chemical equation more informative, the physical states
of the reactants and products are mentioned along with their chemical
formulae. The gaseous, liquid, aqueous and solid states of reactants
and products are represented by the notations (g), (l), (aq) and (s),
respectively. The word aqueous (aq) is written if the reactant or product
is present as a solution in water.
The balanced Eq. (1.9) becomes
3Fe(s) + 4H2O(g) → Fe3O4(s) + 4H2(g)      (1.10)
Note that the symbol (g) is used with H2O to indicate that in this
reaction water is used in the form of steam.
Usually physical states are not included in a chemical equation unless
it is necessary to specify them.
Sometimes the reaction conditions, such as temperature, pressure,
catalyst, etc., for the reaction are indicated above and/or below the arrow
1) CO(g) + 2H2(g)  --340 atm-->  CH3OH(l)

2) 6CO2(aq) + 12H2O(l)  --Sunlight / Chlorophyll-->  C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(aq) + 6H2O(l)