Decomposition Reaction

Have you noticed that the green colour of the ferrous sulphate crystals has changed? 
You can also smell the characteristic odour of burning sulphur.

2FeSO4(s) --Heat--> Fe2O3(s) + SO2(g) + SO3(g)

In this reaction you can observe that a single reactant breaks down to give simpler products. 
This is a decomposition reaction. Ferrous sulphate crystals (FeSO4·7H2O) 
lose water when heated and the colour of the crystals changes. It then 
decomposes to ferric oxide (Fe2O3), sulphur dioxide (SO2) and sulphur 
trioxide (SO3). Ferric oxide is a solid, while SO2 and SO3 are gases.

Decomposition of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide and carbon 
dioxide on heating is an important decomposition reaction used in 
various industries. Calcium oxide is called lime or quick lime. It has 
many uses – one is in the manufacture of cement. When a decomposition 
reaction is carried out by heating, it is called thermal decomposition.

CaCO3(s) --Heat--> CaO(s) + CO2(g)      (1.20)
(Limestone)      (Quick lime)

Another example of a thermal decomposition reaction is given in Activity 1.6.
You will observe the emission of brown fumes.
These fumes are of nitrogen dioxide (NO2
). The
reaction that takes place is –
2Pb(NO3)2(s) --Heat--> 2PbO(s) + 4NO2(g) + O2(g)      (1.21)

(Lead nitrate)      (Lead oxide)      (Nitrogen dioxide)      (Oxygen)

You will see that white silver chloride turns grey in sunlight. This is 
due to the decomposition of silver chloride into silver and chlorine by 
light.

2AgCl(s) --Sunlight--> 2Ag(s) + Cl2(g)

Silver bromide also behaves in the same way.

2AgBr(s) --Sunlight--> 2Ag(s) + Br2(g)      (1.23)

The above reactions are used in black and white photography.

What form of energy is causing these decomposition reactions?

We have seen that decomposition reactions require energy either 
in the form of heat, light or electricity for breaking down the reactants. 
Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic reactions.




